README.md, before:

# SBP.jl

Contains code to implement the summation by parts finite difference methods for some problems.

## Advection-diffusion equation

The code can be found in the `Advection Diffusion/sbp_sat_advection_eq.jl` folder. Consider the one-dimensional model problem [(Mattsson, K. and Nordström, J., 2004)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999104000932?via%3Dihub)

$$
\begin{align*}
  u_t + au_x &= \epsilon u_{xx}, \quad 0\le x \le 1, \quad t \ge 0\\
  u(x,0) &= f(x),\\
  \alpha u(0,t) + u_x(0,t) &= g_0(t),\\
  \beta u(1,t) + u_x(1,t) &= g_1(t).\\
\end{align*}
$$

Assuming an exact solution to the problem

$$
u(x,t) = \sin ({w(x-ct)})e^{-bx}
$$

with the parameters

$$
\begin{align*}
  &\alpha = 1, \quad \beta = 0, \quad c = 2, \quad a = 1,\\
  &b = \frac{c-a}{2\epsilon}, \quad w = \frac{\sqrt{c^2 - a^2}}{2\epsilon}
\end{align*}
$$

Solving the problem using the SBP finite difference method and using Simultaneous Approximation Term (SAT) for applying the boundary condition:

Solution at `T=1.0` s | |
--- | --- |
![](./Images/sol.png) | ![](./Images/rate.png)
**Solution at `T=4.0` s** | |
![](./Images/sol4.0.png) | ![](./Images/rate4.0.png) |

The numerical values of the convergence rates at `T=1.0` s and `T=4.0` s are $[4.2067, 4.1841, 4.1289, 4.0833]$ and $[ 4.1777, 4.1718, 4.1282, 4.0863]$, respectively. The spatial axis is discretized using $N = 30,60,100,200,300$ points (similar to the paper) and using the SBP method whose order of accuracy is 4 in the interior. The temporal direction was discretized using the fourth order Runge-Kutta scheme with $\Delta t = 5\times 10^{-5}$. The observed rate of convergence in the spatial direction and is in agreement with the theory. On invalidating the penalty parameter choice by taking $\tau_0 = -\epsilon/2$ instead of $\tau_0 = -\epsilon$:

https://github.com/Balaje/SBP-PML/blob/76dda6ccdb01237c5dfcf93c1701a8ea70f2cc6e/MY_SBP/sbp_sat_advection_eq.jl#L49

we observe that the rate of convergence is close to $3$ instead of $4$. This can be seen in the figures below

![](./Images/sol_non_opt.png) | ![](./Images/rate_non_opt.png) |
--- | --- |

The numerical values of the convergence rates is $[3.0323, 3.0295, 3.0204, 3.0130]$.

## Incomplete parabolic problem

Now I solve the incomplete parabolic problem

$$
\begin{align*}
  u_t + Cu_x &= D u_{xx} + F(x,t), \quad 0 \le x \le 1, \quad t \ge 0\\
  u(x, 0) &= f(x), \quad t \ge 0\\
  L_0 u &= g_0(t), \quad x = 0, \quad t \ge 0\\
  L_1 u &= g_1(t), \quad x = 1, \quad t \ge 0 
\end{align*}
$$

from [(Mattsson, K. and Nordström, J., 2004)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999104000932?via%3Dihub) using the fourth-order SBP method with the diagonal norm. We observe a suboptimal convergence rate ($\approx 3$) which was also observed in the paper. The code can be found in `Advection Diffusion/sbp_sat_incomplete_parabolic.jl`.

![](./Images/sol_incomplete_parabolic.png) | ![](./Images/sol_incomplete_parabolic_rate.png) |
--- | --- |


## Arbitrary domain

Arbitrary domains can be handled using [Transfinite Interpolation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transfinite_interpolation). Any point in the physical domain can be mapped to the reference domain using the transfinite interpolation. We can then solve the PDE in the reference domain.

![](./Images/interpolation.png)

## Single-Layer Linear Elasticity

We consider the following PDE

$$
\begin{align*}
  \mathbf{u}_{tt} = \nabla \cdot  \sigma + \mathbf{f}, &\quad \mathbf{x} \in \Omega = [0,1]^2, \quad t>0\\
  \mathbf{u}(x,0) = \mathbf{{u}_0(x)}, &\quad \mathbf{x} \in \Omega\\
  \sigma \cdot \mathbf{n} = \bf{g}(t), &\quad \mathbf{x} \in \partial\Omega, \quad t>0
\end{align*}
$$

where

$$
\mathbf{u}(\mathbf{x},t) = 
    \begin{bmatrix}
      u(\mathbf{x},t)\\
      v(\mathbf{x},t)
    \end{bmatrix}, \qquad 
\sigma(\mathbf{u}) = 
    \begin{bmatrix}
      A(\mathbf{x})\frac{\partial \mathbf{u}}{\partial x} + C(\mathbf{x})\frac{\partial \mathbf{u}}{\partial y}&
      C^T(\mathbf{x})\frac{\partial \mathbf{u}}{\partial x} + B(\mathbf{x})\frac{\partial \mathbf{u}}{\partial y}\\
    \end{bmatrix}, \qquad \mathbf{f} = \mathbf{f}(\mathbf{x},t),
$$

are the displacement field and the Cauchy Stress tensor, respectively. The quantity $\mathbf{n}$ denotes the outward unit normal on the boundary. The material properties 

$$
  A(\mathbf{x}), B(\mathbf{x}) \quad \text{and} \quad C(\mathbf{x})
$$

are symmetric matrices which are generally functions of the spatial coordinates. We then solve the PDE in the unit square using the 4th order SBP method. The script `Linear Elasticity/1_layer_linear_elasticity.jl` contains the code to solve the case when the material properties are constant in space. We assume an exact solution

$$
\mathbf{u}(\mathbf{x},t) = 
\begin{bmatrix}
  \sin(\pi x)\sin(\pi y)sin(\pi t)\\
  \sin(2\pi x)\sin(2\pi y)sin(\pi t)  
\end{bmatrix}\\\\
$$

and compute the right-hand side $\mathbf{f}$ and the boundary data $\mathbf{g}$. We consider a uniform two-dimensional discretization with $N = [11,21,31,41,51]$ points. To discretize the temporal direction, we use the Crank Nicolson scheme with $\Delta t = 10^{-3}$ and solve till final time $T = 1.25$ s. Following are the approximate and exact solutions with $N = 51$ points. 

![](./Images/le-x-disp.png) | ![](./Images/le-y-disp.png) 
-- | -- |

The $L^2$-error and the convergence rates are as follows

``` julia 
julia> L²Error
5-element Vector{Float64}:
 0.01675066748858688
 0.0010581963168786465
 0.00018482019369399396
 5.387918811243126e-5
 2.111002788292322e-5

julia> rate = log.(L²Error[2:end]./L²Error[1:end-1])./log.(h[2:end]./h[1:end-1])
4-element Vector{Float64}:
 3.9845393793309083
 4.303545948944458
 4.2847270008177825
 4.199073174065968
```

Convergence Rates |
--- |
![](./Images/le-rate.png) |

The code now works for problems in arbitrary domain:

![](./Images/solu-arbitrary.png) | ![](./Images/solv-arbitrary.png) | ![](./Images/domain-rate.png) | 
--- | --- | --- |

``` julia
julia> rate
6-element Vector{Float64}:
 3.2746487909958084
 3.7040378918078023
 3.9304181708948893
 4.0365715322662075
 4.0870114543739
 4.111380600861835

julia> L²Error
7-element Vector{Float64}:
 0.006591573645793299
 0.0017472380550776494
 0.0006019691925094348
 0.00025042483107953257
 0.00011996557109679588
 6.389168322477752e-5
 3.689923513170043e-5
```

## References

- Mattsson, K. and Nordström, J., 2004. Summation by parts operators for finite difference approximations of second derivatives. Journal of Computational Physics, 199(2), pp.503-540.

Commit message:

Examples working with the new interface

README.md, after:

# SBP.jl

Contains code to implement the summation by parts finite difference methods for some problems. The plan of this package is to turn these tiny codes into a full flegded package with nice interfaces. To use this package, in the Julia prompt:

```julia
julia> ]
pkg> activate .
julia> import SBP
```

I have added only the fourth-order SBP operators in this code. To get the SBP operators corresponding to the constant coefficients

```julia
sbp = SBP_1_2_CONSTANT_0_1(n+1) # Get the SBP operators using the package
```

![](./Images/op.png)

The figure shows the diagonal norm, the first derivative operator, the narrow stencil second derivative operators. I use the UnicodePlots.jl package to display the sparsity pattern.


## Advection-diffusion equation

The code can be found in the `examples/sbp_sat_advection_eq.jl` folder. Consider the one-dimensional model problem [(Mattsson, K. and Nordström, J., 2004)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999104000932?via%3Dihub)

$$
\begin{align*}
  u_t + au_x &= \epsilon u_{xx}, \quad 0\le x \le 1, \quad t \ge 0\\
  u(x,0) &= f(x),\\
  \alpha u(0,t) + u_x(0,t) &= g_0(t),\\
  \beta u(1,t) + u_x(1,t) &= g_1(t).\\
\end{align*}
$$

Assuming an exact solution to the problem

$$
u(x,t) = \sin ({w(x-ct)})e^{-bx}
$$

with the parameters

$$
\begin{align*}
  &\alpha = 1, \quad \beta = 0, \quad c = 2, \quad a = 1,\\
  &b = \frac{c-a}{2\epsilon}, \quad w = \frac{\sqrt{c^2 - a^2}}{2\epsilon}
\end{align*}
$$

Solving the problem using the SBP finite difference method and using Simultaneous Approximation Term (SAT) for applying the boundary condition:

Solution at `T=1.0` s | |
--- | --- |
![](./Images/sol.png) | ![](./Images/rate.png)
**Solution at `T=4.0` s** | |
![](./Images/sol4.0.png) | ![](./Images/rate4.0.png) |

The numerical values of the convergence rates at `T=1.0` s and `T=4.0` s are $[4.2067, 4.1841, 4.1289, 4.0833]$ and $[ 4.1777, 4.1718, 4.1282, 4.0863]$, respectively. The spatial axis is discretized using $N = 30,60,100,200,300$ points (similar to the paper) and using the SBP method whose order of accuracy is 4 in the interior. The temporal direction was discretized using the fourth order Runge-Kutta scheme with $\Delta t = 5\times 10^{-5}$. The observed rate of convergence in the spatial direction and is in agreement with the theory. On invalidating the penalty parameter choice by taking $\tau_0 = -\epsilon/2$ instead of $\tau_0 = -\epsilon$:

https://github.com/Balaje/SBP-PML/blob/76dda6ccdb01237c5dfcf93c1701a8ea70f2cc6e/MY_SBP/sbp_sat_advection_eq.jl#L49

we observe that the rate of convergence is close to $3$ instead of $4$. This can be seen in the figures below

![](./Images/sol_non_opt.png) | ![](./Images/rate_non_opt.png) |
--- | --- |

The numerical values of the convergence rates is $[3.0323, 3.0295, 3.0204, 3.0130]$.
	
## Incomplete parabolic problem

Now I solve the incomplete parabolic problem

$$
\begin{align*}
  u_t + Cu_x &= D u_{xx} + F(x,t), \quad 0 \le x \le 1, \quad t \ge 0\\
  u(x, 0) &= f(x), \quad t \ge 0\\
  L_0 u &= g_0(t), \quad x = 0, \quad t \ge 0\\
  L_1 u &= g_1(t), \quad x = 1, \quad t \ge 0 
\end{align*}
$$

from [(Mattsson, K. and Nordström, J., 2004)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999104000932?via%3Dihub) using the fourth-order SBP method with the diagonal norm. We observe a suboptimal convergence rate ($\approx 3$) which was also observed in the paper. The code can be found in `examples/sbp_sat_incomplete_parabolic.jl`.

![](./Images/sol_incomplete_parabolic.png) | ![](./Images/sol_incomplete_parabolic_rate.png) |
--- | --- |


## Arbitrary domain

Arbitrary domains can be handled using [Transfinite Interpolation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transfinite_interpolation). Any point in the physical domain can be mapped to the reference domain using the transfinite interpolation. We can then solve the PDE in the reference domain.

![](./Images/interpolation.png)

## Single-Layer Linear Elasticity

We consider the following PDE

$$
\begin{align*}
  \mathbf{u}_{tt} = \nabla \cdot  \sigma + \mathbf{f}, &\quad \mathbf{x} \in \Omega = [0,1]^2, \quad t>0\\
  \mathbf{u}(x,0) = \mathbf{{u}_0(x)}, &\quad \mathbf{x} \in \Omega\\
  \sigma \cdot \mathbf{n} = \bf{g}(t), &\quad \mathbf{x} \in \partial\Omega, \quad t>0
\end{align*}
$$

where

$$
\mathbf{u}(\mathbf{x},t) = 
    \begin{bmatrix}
      u(\mathbf{x},t)\\
      v(\mathbf{x},t)
    \end{bmatrix}, \qquad 
\sigma(\mathbf{u}) = 
    \begin{bmatrix}
      A(\mathbf{x})\frac{\partial \mathbf{u}}{\partial x} + C(\mathbf{x})\frac{\partial \mathbf{u}}{\partial y}&
      C^T(\mathbf{x})\frac{\partial \mathbf{u}}{\partial x} + B(\mathbf{x})\frac{\partial \mathbf{u}}{\partial y}\\
    \end{bmatrix}, \qquad \mathbf{f} = \mathbf{f}(\mathbf{x},t),
$$

are the displacement field and the Cauchy Stress tensor, respectively. The quantity $\mathbf{n}$ denotes the outward unit normal on the boundary. The material properties 

$$
  A(\mathbf{x}), B(\mathbf{x}) \quad \text{and} \quad C(\mathbf{x})
$$

are symmetric matrices which are generally functions of the spatial coordinates. We then solve the PDE in the unit square using the 4th order SBP method. The script `Linear Elasticity/1_layer_linear_elasticity.jl` contains the code to solve the case when the material properties are constant in space. We assume an exact solution

$$
\mathbf{u}(\mathbf{x},t) = 
\begin{bmatrix}
  \sin(\pi x)\sin(\pi y)sin(\pi t)\\
  \sin(2\pi x)\sin(2\pi y)sin(\pi t)  
\end{bmatrix}\\\\
$$

and compute the right-hand side $\mathbf{f}$ and the boundary data $\mathbf{g}$. We consider a uniform two-dimensional discretization with $N = [11,21,31,41,51]$ points. To discretize the temporal direction, we use the Crank Nicolson scheme with $\Delta t = 10^{-3}$ and solve till final time $T = 1.25$ s. Following are the approximate and exact solutions with $N = 51$ points. 

![](./Images/le-x-disp.png) | ![](./Images/le-y-disp.png) 
-- | -- |

The $L^2$-error and the convergence rates are as follows

``` julia 
julia> L²Error
5-element Vector{Float64}:
 0.01675066748858688
 0.0010581963168786465
 0.00018482019369399396
 5.387918811243126e-5
 2.111002788292322e-5

julia> rate = log.(L²Error[2:end]./L²Error[1:end-1])./log.(h[2:end]./h[1:end-1])
4-element Vector{Float64}:
 3.9845393793309083
 4.303545948944458
 4.2847270008177825
 4.199073174065968
```

Convergence Rates |
--- |
![](./Images/le-rate.png) |

The code now works for problems in arbitrary domain:

![](./Images/solu-arbitrary.png) | ![](./Images/solv-arbitrary.png) | ![](./Images/domain-rate.png) | 
--- | --- | --- |

``` julia
julia> rate
6-element Vector{Float64}:
 3.2746487909958084
 3.7040378918078023
 3.9304181708948893
 4.0365715322662075
 4.0870114543739
 4.111380600861835

julia> L²Error
7-element Vector{Float64}:
 0.006591573645793299
 0.0017472380550776494
 0.0006019691925094348
 0.00025042483107953257
 0.00011996557109679588
 6.389168322477752e-5
 3.689923513170043e-5
```

## References

- Mattsson, K. and Nordström, J., 2004. Summation by parts operators for finite difference approximations of second derivatives. Journal of Computational Physics, 199(2), pp.503-540.
